In mid-November, the world was watching with apprehension the unfolding drama surrounding the repatriation of the first batch of Rohingya refugees to Myanmar. All arrangements were completed at both ends of the Gumdhum border point, with buses ready at Unchiprang Camp in Teknaf to load the refugees with necessary provisions and supplies. Instead of boarding the buses, the refugees came out in hundreds against the repatriation attempt and emphatically refused to return to their homeland for fear of fresh persecution and confinement in the camps in Rakhine.
The refugees were given voluntary choices, thanks to the Refugee Relief and Repatriation Commissioner (RRRC) and the government of Bangladesh. No one was forced to return to Myanmar. The repatriation plan was abandoned, and now rescheduled for 2019.
Meanwhile, all available reports indicate that the Rohingya crisis continues in the Rakhine state. Faced with discrimination and persecution in the largely Buddhist state, many Rohingyas have been fleeing the country since 1986 to countries in the region. Of an estimated 3.5 million Rohingyas in Rakhine, close to 2.0 million now live as refugees or migrants in countries like Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, the United Arab Emirates, India, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, and not to mention, Bangladesh.
Since August 2017, around 800,000 Rohingyas have crossed the border into Bangladesh to escape military crackdown and genocide. Another 300,000 Rohingyas, who fled earlier waves of violence in 1982 and 1990, are already living in camps in Cox's Bazar. The rest—an estimated 150,000 who live in Rakhine state—are currently confined to camps, having been displaced during the violence in 2012. In a nutshell, the military has been successful in forcing out Rohingyas from Myanmar; those still living inside the country are completely at the mercy of the army in the detention camps.
Clearly, there is no environment for the repatriation of Rohingyas to Myanmar at the moment. The United Nations and other international agencies and relief organisations have repeatedly stated that existing conditions for the Rohingyas to return are inadequate and may prove risky. The refugees must not be repatriated to Myanmar without addressing the causes of gross violations of human rights, abuses, and violence against the Rohingyas.
This would obviously require bringing some of the senior military officers of Myanmar to justice and ensuring accountability for the gravest of atrocities perpetrated against the Rohingyas. A recent UN report detailed their crackdown and gang-rapes and mass killings “with genocidal intent” and urged prosecution of the army's commander-in-chief and five generals under the international law. This should be the absolute minimum to establish a sense of justice among the survivors and the international community as well. Accountability would also be crucial for the voluntary return of Rohingyas and serve as an important confidence-building measure. 
The denial by the Myanmar military and government of the atrocities committed against the Rohingyas, coupled with a lack of access to Myanmar for the UN bodies and other international observers to assess and monitor preparations for any future repatriation efforts, can only suggest that Myanmar is not serious about repatriation. This was further manifested by their so-called “verification” process that allows the military to divide the refugees and treat some as foreigners, meaning migrants from Bangladesh. Myanmar has consistently refused to acknowledge the Rohingya ethnicity or recognise them as citizens.
To date, the Myanmar government has said or done nothing to suggest that the Rohingyas will be safe upon repatriation. The squalid, prison-like houses built near the border with the help of India and China to house the returning refugees demonstrate the attitudes of the government to the Rohingyas. The refugees don't want to return to camp life in Rakhine. They want to return to their lands, homes and villages. The houses should be built in their villages, which were burned down by the army. They would further need schools, clinics and other necessary social services and support to rebuild their communities should they decide to return.
A key lesson learned from this month's failed attempt at repatriation is that the conditions must improve in Myanmar. A long list of issues must be addressed to make it right and safe for the refugees to return. Firstly, Myanmar must allow international investigations into the allegations of crimes against humanity. Secondly, Myanmar should recognise the Rohingyas as an ethnic group. Thirdly, citizenship must be guaranteed to all Rohingyas. Fourthly, the Rohingya refugees must be allowed to return to their lands and homes with full support for construction of houses, resettlement and economic rehabilitation of the affected communities. Finally, Myanmar should ensure their freedom of movement and equal rights as citizens.
These are not easy to achieve, particularly given the responses from the military and the government of Aung San Suu Kyi. The international community should put pressure on Myanmar to create the right conditions for repatriation. Canada has already revoked Suu Kyi's honorary citizenship. Many world leaders strongly rebuked her over the persecution of the Rohingyas. Suu Kyi is not taking—or is unable to take—any action against her own military. Both China and India can, and should, do more in creating the right conditions for repatriation and at the same time support in reconstruction and rebuilding the lives of the Rohingyas.
The Bangladesh government should now work aggressively with its allies and the international bodies and focus more on negotiations with Myanmar on the rights issues to create a safer environment for their voluntary return. Bangladesh has earned international acclaim for providing refuge and assistance to over a million Rohingya refugees. However, there should not be any illusions about a quick solution to this refugee crisis. Global refugee repatriation experiences dealing with such a massive number of displaced people suggest that a much longer timeline, resources and diplomacy would be required to resolve the crisis. There are no easy answers and resolutions to such a human tragedy. Fine Gael Senator Paudie Coffey believes the loss of his Dáil seat in 2016 by 300 votes was due to a newspaper article about county boundary changes which likened him to an 18th-century robber, the High Court heard.

He is suing Iconic Newspapers, publishers of the 'Kilkenny People', over the June 15, 2016, article headed "Coffey the Robber".

It contained comments from his FG colleague John Paul Phelan TD accusing the then minister for state, now Senator Coffey, of trying to "rob" a chunk of south Kilkenny.

Mr Phelan was then quoted as saying: "We've all heard of Crotty the robber - the 18th-century highwayman who hid himself away in a cave in the foothills of the Comeragh Mountains.

"He was the leader of a gang of bloodthirsty highwaymen."

Opening Mr Coffey's case yesterday, Richard Kean SC said the article was published about three weeks before the general election and his client lost his Dáil seat, which he first won in 2011, by 300 votes.

He became depressed and isolated after he lost his seat and was subjected to comments such as "Coffey the robber" at sporting events and other occasions, counsel said.

It was also not part, as the newspaper claimed, of a public discourse or debate about boundary changes, because Mr Coffey had never been asked by the paper to respond to the claims of Mr Phelan.

Mr Kean said his client sought a retraction and redress from the paper but this was not forthcoming.

As a last resort, he had to bring defamation proceedings to vindicate his good name.

Mr Coffey (49), who was born and lives in Portlaw, Co Waterford, was appointed to the Seanad by Enda Kenny after he lost his Dáil seat in 2016.

In his action, he claims the words in the article were defamatory and meant, among other things, he was guilty of misuse of public office and was a person of severe ill-repute, akin to an 18th-century highwayman.

He claims the article was false and published maliciously and he is seeking damages.

The newspaper publisher denies the claims.

It claims that the natural and ordinary meaning of the article was, among other things, that a review of the Waterford/Kilkenny boundary was underway and that Mr Phelan publicly and politically disagreed with his FG colleague in relation to it.

It also meant Mr Phelan believed his chances of future electoral success would be adversely affected by the boundary change and had criticised the review process.

The case continues before Mr Justice Bernard Barton and a jury.The ongoing tariff dispute between US and China should be a warning sign to Bangladeshi entrepreneurs. Much of the country's industrial base is highly concentrated in readymade garments (RMG) and related products. More than 80 percent of Bangladesh's exports originate from the garment industry. The garment industry, although strong and growing, is in no way immune to upheavals which could arrive anytime in an unexpected shape or form.

Technological innovation gives foreign competitors a significant edge and unless Bangladeshi entrepreneurs take advantage of new technologies first and embrace new methods of improvement of business processes, very little will change. I remember my father and grandfather used to lament the loss of muslin, the beautiful silk textile, when I was growing up. They blamed many things for the demise of muslin; other than technology, perhaps a lack of vision of our leadership was more of a factor.

Aside from adopting new technology, Bangladesh's industries need to make continuous business process improvement an integral part of their growth strategies. In the 80s, the US automotive industry lost its leadership role to Japanese automakers. It was an unthinkable event. The rapid rise of the Japanese auto industry was partly spurred by Japan's adoption of the philosophy of continuous business process improvement. Workers' training was at the core of that philosophy. The Japanese re-introduced the term “on-time inventory”, perfected it and leveraged it to be highly cost-competitive. “Kaizen” is the Japanese term for business process improvement. Ironically, the core concept of Kaizen was invented by the Americans, but like many other things, perfected by the Japanese. In today's technology-driven world, the superior quality of Japanese products continues to be driven by the philosophy of Kaizen. Many business executives around the world envy the quality and the craftsmanship of Japanese products.

Bangladeshi businesses should seriously explore the benefits of Kaizen including workers' training. Implementing Kaizen on factory floors may be challenging in the beginning. However, the rewards for embracing continuous business process improvement will come in the form of dominance and leadership. Look where Japan is today. It is hard to even imagine that a few engineers' handheld calculators and ink-jet printers helped turn Japan into an industrial powerhouse. This is the right time to think beyond what is possible and turn Bangladesh into a nation of innovators. Like Japan, we can borrow ideas and then perfect them with our own ingenious ways. The payoffs can be massive: continuous prosperity, reputation, credibility, and respect on the world stage, just to name a few.

According to the latest OEC data, Bangladesh is the 50th largest export economy in the world. Bangladesh exported a little more than USD 30 billion worth of garments in the most recent fiscal year, which ended in June 2018. A huge sum considering the total export revenue of about USD 37 billion. The high concentration of export dollars (80 percent-plus) from garments poses significant risks to the economy and the livelihood of Bangladeshi workers, almost four million of whom are employed in the garments industry. Bangladesh can mitigate the risks of overconcentration in one sector by diversifying its industrial productions into other less technologically-intensive products such as paper goods, mobile phone accessories, umbrellas, basic lighting, tiles, etc. The earnings potential from exporting these products can be significant. Currently, China is the major exporting country for these and many other basic products.


In the wake of escalating tariff disputes, companies in the US are not sitting still. They are examining their supply chain and taking steps to mitigate any disruptions. This is no surprise because US companies are highly competitive, pro-active and averse to supply chain risks. In order to retain their competitive advantage, US businesses had designed backup plans long before the recent tariff war. Vietnam most frequently pops up as an alternative source although Bangladesh has been mentioned in some discussions—though not as a first choice. That sends a subliminal message. Bangladesh needs to do better. We can only hope that smart Bangladeshi entrepreneurs are already thinking ahead. This issue, titled Rethinking Urban Spaces: Dhaka and Beyond, is the fourth instalment of our 216-page special supplement series on the occasion of The Daily Star's 27th anniversary.

Dhaka is a city of historical roots and deep problems; a city we love and sometimes love to hate. As the urban share of the country's population increases, the problems we face become more acute. But we like to think that none of the problems we face today is beyond solution. Be it traffic congestion, lack of public spaces, encroached waterbodies, or issues of decentralisation, we look towards a future Dhaka which would be a city at once modern, liveable and yet rooted in our history. For that, we need to rethink our priorities when it comes to planning, be mindful of preserving our heritage and invest in infrastructure that are needed for today and the future. And, as the country dips its toes out of the LDC category, our concerns cannot remain with Dhaka only—development and planning must decentralise towards a wider vision for the whole country.

Towards that visions, in this segment eminent academics, engineers, planners and professionals tackle some of these issues with their insightful and rich articles. Some look towards a Dhaka of the future, while others take a crack at the problems of our present. Together, they present the idea that a better Dhaka is possible and recommendations about how we can get there. We are grateful to all the writers who made this issue possible.The readymade garment (RMG) sector of Bangladesh has made universally applauded advances in the fields of ethical and sustainable manufacturing practices, with huge investments being made in the sector to improve working conditions and environmental standards. But, are the vast improvements that have been made being fully appreciated by the end-consumers and are those consumers willing to pay for ethically produced fashion products?

Following the tragic events of the Rana Plaza disaster, there has quite rightly been huge international focus on the compliance and ethical credentials of manufacturers working in the nation's apparel sector, with the Bangladesh RMG industry now subject to scrutiny regarding all aspects of health and safety in the workplace as well as guaranteeing that ethical and environmental standards are maintained. Initiatives that were implemented since that fateful day have ensured that all standards within the Bangladesh RMG sector have greatly improved and the country now has some of the highest rated LEED factories in the world, manufacturing product that meets global ethical and social compliance standards.

Are these endeavours to improve our industry being acknowledged, not just by the buyers and brands that purchase our products, but by their customers, the end consumer? Evidence suggests that consumers are becoming more aware of their environmental impact and strive to lead a more sustainable and environmentally aware lifestyle—but who are these consumers and are they willing to pay more for ethically sourced apparel?

There are growing numbers of consumers in Europe and the US (the RMG sectors key export markets) who consciously strive to reduce their carbon footprint by supporting sustainable agriculture and ethical fashion brands, buying organic products and choosing alternative transport rather than driving their own cars. These consumers are concerned about the rights of workers and their safety, living wages and health and the social and environmental impacts of the product they purchase. What is changing this attitude is the viewpoint of the millennial generation (those consumers in their 20's-early 30's who are more aware than their parents of the benefits of ethically and sustainably sourced products and, when surveyed are more willing to pay for them.

Retailers and brands have to provide what their consumers want, but what is increasingly more important is that they also educate their consumer regarding the ethical and sustainable business that they are developing. A survey conducted by the Fairtrade Foundation found that '82 percent of UK teenagers think companies need to act more responsibly, while just 45 percent said they trust businesses to do so'. Obviously more work is required by our trading partners to communicate all the ethical and sustainable initiatives that have been invested in by the RMG business in Bangladesh to these millennial consumers who, in the large part constitute their target audience.


In the past, the thought of who produced your garments and under what conditions never crossed the consumer's mind and was merely a secondary concern after price and style. Things are very different today, and the millennial generation has a lot to do with it. They've grown up understanding the current state of our environment and desperate need for sustainable and ethically sourced products and are more willing to pay for it than former generations.

A survey conducted on 1,000 UK customers and their views on leading clothing retailers by Morgan Stanley Research found that even though price and quality concerns continue to rank the highest, ethical concerns have gained importance, specifically with the younger consumer demographic. Fifty-one percent of respondents stated that ethical credentials of apparel retailers are somewhat important to very important while only 13 percent stated that they are somewhat unimportant to not important at all. The survey also found that younger consumers are more concerned about ethics when shopping as 58 percent of 16-24 year olds stated that ethical credentials are very or somewhat important while 49 percent of people aged 55 or older viewed ethical credentials as somewhat unimportant or not important at all. One can see that this number rises with age.

However, Steve Polski, the senior director of supply chains and sustainability at Cargill, a US company specialising in bringing sustainable foodstuffs to consumers, has found that “even though consumers demand sustainable products and services, they are often unwilling to pay a premium for them”. He also states that it is clear that consumers care about brand's sustainability efforts, but they generally won't pay more for the products and would instead reward the brand with customer loyalty. This suggests to me that the onus weighs heavily on the brand—through their efforts to source more ethical, sustainable product they can be rewarded with greater customer loyalty, thus increasing sales, whilst at the same time applying pricing pressure on the manufacturers so that the costs inherent with these ethical, sustainable practices is borne at source. Should the brands not consider that, to achieve a truly sustainable, ethical sourcing process they share the burden of the cost implications, possibly even absorbing some of the costs as part of their marketing budgets—after all, increased brand loyalty is what the majority of brands and retailers aspire to with the advertising that they pay for annually?

In another example, co-author of, “The Myth of the Ethical Consumer,” Professor Timothy Devinney argues that there is a belief that our purchasing behaviour is driven by our values, but that in reality, factors such as price, quality and value override our core values in the end. He goes as far as saying that conscience-driven shopping does not exist and that there is a disconnect between the values people express and the actual buying of ethical products in the market.

There is also the simple issue of economics that must not be ignored. A vast customer base exists both in Europe and the US who, quite simply, cannot afford to put ethical concerns to the forefront of their purchasing decisions. For those on limited household income, the priority when making a purchase is price, with quality a close second and ethical sourcing far lower down the scale of concern. It is not that this sector of society does not care it is, simply, that they cannot afford to! Thus, it is the premise of the lower middle class and above sectors of society that appreciate and support ethical product who should be encouraged to change their buying habits sooner.

Changing the buying habits of the end-consumer is a duty that needs to be embraced by the brands and retailers that Bangladesh trades with. It should be their responsibility to communicate with their customers and detail the steps that they are taking to produce ethically sourced product and, where necessary, detailing the impact that this has on goods in-store.

